Welcome to the next
week of our course
on parallel functional
programming with Java.
Now that we've described the
structure, functionality,
and APIs of the Java
fork-join framework,
we can turn our attention to
the common ForkJoinPool, which
is the default pool
used by any ForkJoinTask
that's not submitted to a
specific pool within a process.
This common pool helps to
optimize resource utilization,
since it's aware of which
cores are use globally
within a process, thereby
maximizing process core
utilization via work-stealing
from a centralized pool
of threads.
It's also the pool that's used
by the Java parallel streams
framework, covered
in prior weeks,
as well as the
default pool that's
used by the Java completable
future framework, covered
in upcoming weeks.
Although the default
number of threads
in the common ForkJoinPool is
one less than the total number
of processor cores known to
the Java execution environment,
a program using the common
ForkJoinPool actually
uses all available cores
since the calling thread
is borrowed and used
temporarily as part of the pool.
However, this default number
of threads may be inadequate
for some programs such as
I/O-bound apps that download
and process content
from the web.
Therefore, the common
ForkJoinPool size
can be expanded and
contracted programmatically
by various means we describe in
detail in this week's lessons.
Although the size of
the common ForkJoinPool
can be set by modifying
a system property,
this approach is inflexible
since this property can only
be set once before the
common ForkJoinPool is first
initialized.
Moreover, it's often hard to
estimate the number of threads
set by this approach.
Therefore, the
fork-join framework
also supports a so-called
ManagedBlocker mechanism,
which temporarily
adds worker threads
to the common
ForkJoinPool on demand,
such as when a task
blocks on I/O operations
or synchronizers.
We explain how to program
the ManagedBlocker mechanism
and also show how to
encapsulate this mechanism
in a convenient wrapper class.
The bulk of this week's
lessons describe an application
that applies different Java
ForkJoinPool programming
models on a common data set, and
then quantifies the trade-offs
between these models.
These programming models
evaluate the performance
of using work stealing the
dispersed tasks to worker
threads, compared with using
recursive decomposition
to basically disperse
tasks to worker threads.
We end this week's
lessons by comparing
a ForkJoinPool-based solutions
with a parallel streams-based
solution to underscore the pros
and cons of each framework.